---
title: Aviatrix Iteration 2: Distance & Fuel
---

# Aviatrix Iteration 2: Distance & Fuel

Right now our magical plane can fly around and around, never running out of fuel. Let's work on tracking how far we're going, how much fuel we're using, and build the ability to refuel.

## Tracking Distance Flown

When you type in `a` to read the gauges in `main.swift` you see something like this:

```bash
Reading the gauges...

| Running:   | ✅
| Location:  | St. Louis
```

The other lines in `main.swift`'s `gauge` function are commented out because an error would be thrown; those variables don't yet exist in `Aviatrix`. Let's start out by addressing the distance.

### In `main.swift`

When you look in the `gauges` function in `main.swift` you see a line like this:

```swift
print("| Distance:  | \(plane.distanceTraveled) miles")
```

That tells us the distance is coming from the `distanceTraveled` property on the `Aviatrix` class, which doesn't exist yet...

### `distanceTraveled`

In Aviatrix, we need to create a `distanceTraveled` property -- it's just a number that's stored, not a function that does calculations.

> We need to set it to `0` when the plane is first created.

Great! We now have a counter to keep track of the number of miles travelled. However, it never gets changed. We need to write some code to change that.

> What code can you add to the `flyTo` function so that it updates the value of `distanceTraveled`?

Pro-Tip: **pseudo-code** the things that need to happen here. _Then_ make it happen with Swift. Make sure that the values [accumulate](https://www.javatpoint.com/swift-compound-assignment-operators) as you go from one city to another, _not_ resetting each time. Pay careful attention to the order of your instructions in `flyTo`!

#### Results

When it's working and you fly a plane from St. Louis to Denver, the gauges would say:

```bash
| Running:   | ✅
| Location:  | Denver
| Distance:  | 768 miles
```

Then after flying back to St. Louis:

```bash
| Running:   | ✅
| Location:  | St. Louis
| Distance:  | 1536 miles
```
<br>
#### AHEAD OF THE CLASS? Here's a Challenge

> Starting in St. Louis, what's the closest you can get to flying 5000 miles without going over?

## Burning Fuel

It takes a lot of gasoline to move an airplane. Commercial flights loaded up with passengers use about five gallons of gas to go just one mile!

Let's build out the fuel-tracking in our project.

### In The Console vs. Code

When you read the gauges in the console you see:

```bash
Reading the gauges...

| Running:   | ✅
| Location:  | St. Louis
| Distance:  | 0 miles
```

In our code, we have something like this:

```swift
print("Reading the gauges...")
print(" ")
print("| Running:   | ✅   ")
print("| Location:  | \(plane.location)")
print("| Distance:  | \(plane.distanceTraveled) miles")
//    print("| Fuel:      | \(plane.fuelLevel) gallons")
//    print("| Max Fuel:  | \(plane.maxFuel) gallons")
//    print("| MPG:       | \(plane.milesPerGallon)")
//    print("| Fuel Bill: | \(plane.fuelCost)")
```

...meaning we will need a `fuelLevel`, `maxFuel`, `milesPerGallon`, and `fuelCost` property or action/function on the `Aviatrix` class. Let's take it one step at a time:

### Max Fuel & Fuel Level

> Can you modify the code in your Aviatrix so the Max Fuel shows up as 5000 gallons? Think back to what we did to get `distanceTraveled` to appear.

When it works your gauges will show this:

```bash
Reading the gauges...

| Running:   | ✅
| Location:  | St. Louis
| Distance:  | 0 miles
| Max Fuel:  | 5000 gallons
```

> Now, create a `fuelLevel` property that starts at 5000.0 also, assuming that we start the trip with a full gas tank!

### Fuel to Fly

Let's track how much fuel we're using to fly:

* You know how far it is from one city to another
* Your fuel level is stored in the `fuelLevel` property.

Let's add another property- `milesPerGallon` and set it to `0.4`.

> Can you modify your `flyTo` function in the `Aviatrix` class so that it calculates how much fuel is used during the flight, and then decreases `fuelLevel` by the right amount?

When it's working correctly and you fly from St. Louis to Denver your gauges will say:

```bash
Reading the gauges...

| Running:   | ✅
| Location:  | Denver
| Distance:  | 768 miles
| Fuel:      | 3080.00 gallons
| Max Fuel:  | 5000 gallons
| MPG:       | 0.4
```

## Refueling

Each airport is happy to sell us jet fuel.

### In `main.swift`

You can look at the `refuel` function around line 50 and you'll see:

```swift
let refuelData = plane.refuel()

print("Refueling...")
print("⛽ Here in _________, jet fuel costs _________")
print("⛽ You refueled _________ gallons totaling _________")
```

There are a lot of things happening in there!

### `refuel` - Iteration 0

> Let's make sure the first print statement actually prints a complete sentence. Fill in those blanks with interpolated variables. You already have the first. For the second, you'll need to access the data in `AviatrixData.swift` from you `main.swift` file.

### `refuel` - First Try

First there's a call to the `refuel` action/function. Find that function in `Aviatrix`.

> Can you write one line of code that fills the gas tank back to it's maximum level?

Try running the project. When you fly to another city, then refuel, is your gas tank full? Check the fuel level by reading the gauges.

### `refuel` - Doing Better

> First: return a Double out of this function - it should represent the number of gallons you need to purchase.

> Now, update `main.swift` so both of those print statements are complete sentences.

### Tracking Total Fuel Costs

Eventually you'll have to pay that fuel bill. Let's keep track of our total spent on refueling.

> Create a `fuelCost` variable in `Aviatrix` that starts at zero. Each time you refuel, add the amount that you spent to the total `fuelCost`. Read your gauges after two refuels and make sure that the total is correct.

## What We've Got

* We can navigate between cities
* We track the fuel usage as we move city to city
* We can refuel in any city
* We track the total cost of refueling

### Commit Your Changes

In your terminal, make sure you are still in the aviatrix directory. Add and commit your changes. Your commit message should be something like "Complete Iteration 2".

Now you are ready to push your work up to GitHub. Go back to the <a target="blank" href="https://ameseee.github.io/kwk-curriculum-site/swift-ios/lessons/git-github/">Git & GitHub lesson</a> if you need a refresher!

## Challenges

* Try to visit each of the four cities we started with (St. Louis, Phoenix, Denver, and Salt Lake City). What's the *lowest possible fuel bill* to complete the trip without crashing?
* What's the most total miles you can travel with just one refuel?

#### Challenge

* What happens when you run out of fuel?
* Starting in St. Louis, what's the closest you can get to an empty gas tank without hitting zero?

#### Challenge Extension

Only try this if things are going really well.

Gas is heavy, so the more gas you're carrying the more energy it takes to move your plane and the lower your miles per gallon.

Instead of your MPG always being `0.4` can you modify your code so the MPG is approximated based on the number of gallons in the tank when the flight starts? Here's a formula for you:

```swift
mpg = 0.55 - (Number of Gallons)x(0.00005)
```

What's the difference in the miles-per-gallon of a full tank versus when the tank is empty?
